The National Joint Operational and Intelligence Structure has expressed satisfaction with progress made with its security planning ahead of tomorrow’s annual State of the Nation Address (SONA). The National Joint Operational and Intelligence Structure (NTAJOINTS), which coordinates all security and law enforcement for the President’s SONA, comprises the South African National Defence Force, Cape Town Metro Police and Law Enforcement, Intelligence Coordinating Committee, the Department of Health, Eskom and the SA Police Service. In a statement on Wednesday, the NATJOINTS advised the Cape Town community of limited access in areas surrounding Parliament. This as there will be road closures and parking restrictions. In this regard, temporary fencing will be set up. “Perpetrators will face criminal charges should they be caught tampering with the fencing or breaching it in any way,” it said. Only people with valid accreditation will be allowed into restricted areas in and around Parliament on Thursday. Road closures will be implemented from 6am until 11pm. Affected roads and streets include:  There will also be 24-hour (all-day) parking restrictions on:  The NATJOINTS added that there is a no-fly zone over the Parliament precinct and the areas surrounding it. “This restriction will also apply on the day of the event. No civilian aircraft or remotely piloted aircraft system (RPAS) (drones) will be permitted in the restricted airspace,” read the statement. In addition, all demonstrations will be being catered for in designated areas only on Thursday. For this purpose, speakers' corners have been set up in the following areas: NATJOINTS called on those that would like to air their grievances and to stage protests to do so within the confines of the law. Demonstrators must adhere to the lockdown level 3 regulations as the country is still under the State of Disaster. “Members of the South African Police Service and all law enforcement agencies will continue to apply fundamental policing principles, guided by the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. All law enforcements officers on duty will enforce the law at all times and at all places of deployment. “Each and every member deployed has a responsibility and an obligation to execute their respective mandates professionally, impartially and with integrity,” said the NATJOINTS. – SAnews.gov.za 